---
layout: post
title: a libc qsort() shootout of sorts
location: New York
draft: false
---

The C Standard Library (libc) provides a generic sort function called
[qsort()](http://linux.die.net/man/3/qsort). While the *q* prefix
suggests that [quicksort](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quicksort)
might be a good choice of algorithm, the standard does not dictate
what algorithm an implementation should use.

In this post we'll take a look at a few libc qsort() implementations
and try to contrast their performance.

What to measure?
----------------

Evaluating an implementation's performance by measuring execution time
won't work. Some of the C libraries we're interested in are
proprietary and can only be run on specific hardware with a specific
operating system. Other libraries target particular types of hardware,
e.g. embedded, or are written to work well with a particular
compiler's optimization strategy. Run time on one specific combination
of operating system, hardware and compiler, is not a very useful
metric.

A nice property of qsort() is that it is a generic sort function,
meaning it can sort any type of data. The order and how to compare
elements is defined by a comparison function which the caller must
pass to qsort(). Since we control the comparison function, we can also
count how many comparisons an implementation performs.

We claim that this, the number of comparisons, is a pretty good
metric. Invoking the comparison function is a fairly heavy operation,
so the less often it is invoked the better. This is especially true
when comparisons are expensive, e.g. when sorting long strings or
complex data structures.

It could also be that this is a stupid metric, but whatever.

The combatants
--------------

We've a total of 14 different sort functions to go through. The
not-very-interested reader can skip ahead to the [results and fancy
graphs](#results) below.

### GLIBC

The [GNU project](http://www.gnu.org/)'s libc implementation,
[GLIBC](http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/), powers most GNU/Linux
distributions (sometimes in the shape of
[EGLIBC](http://www.eglibc.org/home)) and several other operating
systems. This qsort() is interesting in that it shuns quicksort in
favour of [merge
sort](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merge_sort). Unlike quicksort,
merge sort is not in-place and requires at least \\(O(n)\\) additional
memory. If that memory is not available, or if it exceeds a fourth of
the machine's physical RAM, then GLIBC will fall back to an in-place
quicksort. The quicksort in turn resorts to [insertion
sort](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insertion_sort) for arrays of 4 or
fewer elements.

In the graphs below, the merge sort and quicksort implementations have
been separated: *glibc-2.17_merge* and *glibc-2.17_quick*
respectively. Our humble gut feeling is that the merge sort is what
most commonly runs in "production" and that it is the most
representative of the two for GLIBC. YMMV.

### BSD

[FreeBSD](http://www.freebsd.org/) qsort() is a quicksort based on
[Engineering a Sort
Function](http://www.cs.fit.edu/~pkc/classes/writing/samples/bentley93engineering.pdf)
by Bentley and McIlroy. A significant deviation from the paper is that
the BSD qsort() doesn't only resort to insertion sort for small
arrays, but also does so whenever a partitioning round is completed
without having moved any elements. The latter is intended to capture
nearly sorted inputs, since insertion sort will handle these cases in
linear time.

The implementation appears to have undergone very little change since
[the days of 4.4BSD
Lite](http://www.freebsd.org/cgi/cvsweb.cgi/src/lib/libc/stdlib/qsort.c?rev=1.1.1.1;content-type=text/x-cvsweb-markup)
and is essentially identical to that of
[OpenBSD](http://www.openbsd.org/) and
[DragonflyBSD](http://www.dragonflybsd.org/). It is also appears in
[newlib](http://sourceware.org/newlib/) and probably also in
[OSX](http://www.apple.com/macosx/).

### NetBSD

[NetBSD](http://www.netbsd.org/)'s qsort() used to be identical to
that of the other BSDs but as of version 6.0 the aforementioned
deviation from Bentley and McIlroy has been removed. In other words,
NetBSD qsort() does *not* switch to insertion sort when a partitioning
round finishes without moving elements.

The motivation for this change seems to be the possibility of
particular inputs triggering insertion sort in spite of the data being
highly unsorted. This in turn would mean quadratic complexity, which
can be devastating for large inputs. The issue has been
[discussed](http://www.mail-archive.com/freebsd-hackers@freebsd.org/msg155127.html)
by FreeBSD hackers earlier.

### klibc

When a machine running Linux is booting and the kernel has just been
brought up,
[klibc](http://git.kernel.org/?p=libs/klibc/klibc.git;a=summary) is
made available to allow certain early user space programs to operate
in spite of not yet having access to a "real" C library. Klibc is
designed to be as small and as correct as possible and is sometimes
mentioned as a good fit for embedded systems. At roughly 40 lines of
C, [the qsort
code](http://git.kernel.org/cgit/libs/klibc/klibc.git/tree/usr/klibc/qsort.c?id=HEAD)
is very compact and easy to grok.

The klibc qsort() implements the [comb
sort](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comb_sort) algorithm; a bubble sort
on steroids. The source code claims a time complexity of \\(O(n\log
n)\\) but there is a lot of conflicting information floating
around. [Vit√°nyi](http://www.cwi.nl/~paulv/papers/sorting.pdf) put the
average complexity at \\(\Omega(n^2/2^p)\\), where \\(p\\) is the
number of passes, but to what extent that matters in practice is not
clear.

### uClibc

Originally created to support [uClinux](http://www.uclinux.org), a
linux distribution targeting embedded devices and micro-controllers,
the [uClibc](http://www.uclibc.org/) is designed to "provide as much
functionality as possible in a small amount of space".

This qsort() implements
[shellsort](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shellsort) which, similarly
to the comb sort of klibc, is an insertion sort on juice. The time
complexity depends on the "gap sequence" used, which in uClibc's case
is the \\((3^k-1)/2\\) (for \\(k=1,2,\ldots\\)) sequence suggested by
Knuth. This puts the algorithm at \\(\Theta(n^{3/2})\\). There are
other more efficient sequences out there but Knuth's sequence is both
compact and simple in implementation.

### dietlibc

The [diet libc](http://www.fefe.de/dietlibc/) is designed to be as
small as possible. Its qsort() is a compact and straightforward
quicksort without many bells and whistles. There is no switch to a low
overhead algorithm for small arrays and only a single element is
sampled when choosing pivot.

It is worth mentioning that dietlibc 0.32 used to always select the
last element as pivot. This results in qsort() using \\(O(n)\\) stack
frames for sorted inputs, effectively crashing due to stack overflow
on anything but tiny numbers of elements. This has been fixed in 0.33
by choosing random pivots and that is also the version we consider in
this article.

### musl

Smoothsort is a variation of heapsort that performs especially well on
nearly sorted inputs. It's a pretty complicated beast and it does take
some effort to wrap one's head around it. Keith Schwarz has posted a
[nice walkthrough](http://www.keithschwarz.com/smoothsort/) that the
interested reader should check out.

Considering that [musl libc](http://www.musl-libc.org/) puts
simplicity among its design goals, the choice of smoothsort could seem
odd. [The
code](http://git.musl-libc.org/cgit/musl/tree/src/stdlib/qsort.c) is
however clean and readable and getting an \\(O(n\log n)\\) worst case
with near linear complexity for nearly sorted inputs is a pretty sweet
deal.

### illumos

OpenSolaris ceased to exist in 2010 after Oracle bought Sun
Microsystems. A fork of the project lives on in the shape of
[illumos](http://www.illumos.org) and
[OpenIndiana](http://www.openindiana.org/). The distinction between
the two is a tad fuzzy but the C library appears to be part of
illumos.

This qsort() is [very well
commented](https://hg.openindiana.org/upstream/illumos/illumos-gate/file/626936c65627/usr/src/common/util/qsort.c)
and should serve nicely as a starting point for anyone interested in
studying the quicksort algorithm. It samples multiple elements for
pivot and switches to insertion sort for small partitions.

### plan9

Last but not least among the free software libraries, we have [Plan 9
from Bell Labs](http://plan9.bell-labs.com/plan9/index.html). This
research OS was/is developed as a successor to Unix. It's worth
[reading up on](http://plan9.bell-labs.com/sys/doc/).

Plan9's qsort() is a very [clean
looking](http://plan9.bell-labs.com/sources/plan9/sys/src/libc/port/qsort.c)
quicksort, although it wouldn't have hurt to throw in a comment or two
in the code. It does not switch to a low overhead algorithm for small
inputs/partitions, but it does sample multiple elements when choosing
its pivot.

### proprietary C libraries

We'll also have a look at the performance of a couple of proprietary
qsort() implementations. The source code for some of these is surely
floating around on the intrawebs, but since they're non-free we won't
discuss them in detail.

* IRIX 6.5 on an Origin 300
* OpenVMS 8.3 on a DEC AlphaStation 200 4/166
* Visual Studio 2005 on x86 running Windows XP
* Solaris 10 on x86

Many thanks to [andoma](http://www.lonelycoder.com/) for providing the
VS2005 data. Many many thanks to
[njansson](http://www.csc.kth.se/~njansson/) for providing access to
his SGI machine, his VAX cluster and to his x86 Solaris server.

Results
-------

### Random data

We'll start by looking at the number of comparisons when sorting
random data.

![Number of comparisons per qsort() implementation when sorting 2^16
 random elements.](/img/min_rand.png)

The slightly less orthodox algorithms - musl's smoothsort, klibc's
comb sort and uClibc's shellsort - can be found on the left hand
side. These are followed by dietlibc's somewhat naive quicksort
implementation.

Further right we find the C libraries of, or associated with, more or
less major operating systems. It may be pointless to try to draw any
conclusions about how these fair against each other - they're all doing
pretty well - but we can still discern three clusters.

The most well performing one holds GLIBC's merge sort and the
proprietary qsort() of solaris 10. To the least well performing we
count OpenVMS, VS2005, IRIX, plan9 and GLIBC's quicksort. The BSD
quicksorts, both with and without the heuristic for switching to
insertion sort for nearly sorted data, and illumos reside in the
middle.

What happens when we bump up the input size by a factor of 64?

![Number of comparisons per qsort() implementation when sorting 2^22
 random elements.](/img/max_rand.png)

There's a distinct improvement for VS2005 and especially for Solaris
10. They are definitely doing something right, but being non-free
software, it's hard to say exactly what. uClibc, on the other hand,
doesn't appear to scale very well at all. This trend is perhaps more
clear as we plot the number of comparisons for multiple input sizes.

![Number of comparisons per qsort() of random data for several
 sizes](/img/count_rand.png)

### Ordered data

While random data may seem like the most important test case, it is
also important to consider nearly or completely sorted inputs. We
should be able to expect nice behaviour from FreeBSD, with its switch
to insertion sort for nearly sorted data, but not so much from NetBSD
which removed said switch. Musl libc's smoothsort should also behave
nicely for these inputs.

![Number of comparisons per qsort() implementation when sorting 2^22
 increasing elements.](/img/max_inc.png)

As expected, both FreeBSD and musl libc perform very few comparisons
in this case. We also see that uClibc's shellsort is doing quite
well. Given the shellsort algorithm's basis in insertion sort, which
is great for sorted inputs, this is not too surprising. The merge sort
of GLIBC also deserves mention.

Finally, we'll have a look at what happens when sorting strictly
decreasing input, i.e. the reverse of sorted input.

![Number of comparisons per qsort() implementation when sorting 2^22
 decreasing elements.](/img/max_dec.png "max dec")

Here we see a drop in performance for musl, uClibc and NetBSD. FreeBSD
however remains the same. As it turns out, FreeBSD's strong
performance on decreasing data stems from how the quicksort
partitioning round is implemented. It mostly reverses the order of the
elements in each partition, which in turn allows the heuristic for
nearly sorted data to kick in early. Is this intentional or just a
happy accident? No idea.

Does this matter?
-----------------

Previously we argued that the number of comparisons is a useful
metric. If nothing else, it allows us to reason about the relative
performance of proprietary implementations running on archaic/obscure
hardware (no offense to fans of SGI or VAX). But how strong is the
correlation between this metric and actual performance?

In the bar chart below we find actual execution time in seconds side
by side with the number of comparisons for all the free software
implementations. This data was gathered on a Lenovo X220 running
Debian GNU/Linux. Compilation was done with gcc 4.4.5 using
optimization level 0 (-O0).

![Runtime and number of comparisons per qsort() when sorting random
 integers.](/img/perf_int.png)

Again, we're not really interested in which implementation happens to
be the fastest on our particular combination of hardware, OS and
compiler, but it is pleasant to note that this data doesn't completely
contradict the hypothesis of the number of comparisons being a
reasonable metric.

That was all. Over and out.
